docs(tutorial): overleaf (#2219)
scaleway/docs-content: tutorials/overleaf/index.mdx

---
meta:
  title: Installing Overleaf Community Edition
  description: This page shows you how to install Overleaf Community Edition on Ubuntu Linux
content:
  h1: Installing Overleaf Community Edition
  paragraph: This page shows you how to install Overleaf Community Edition on Ubuntu Linux
tags: compute mediaserver media Overleaf Community Edition documents editor
categories:
  - compute
dates:
  validation: 2023-10-02
  posted: 2023-10-02
---

> Overleaf is a collaborative writing and publishing system that uses LaTeX a typesetting software that allows for the creation of structured, professional documents online.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overleaf is a collaborative writing and publishing system that uses LaTeX, a typesetting software that allows for the creation of structured, professional documents online.
```

> Overleaf is a collaborative writing and publishing system that utilizes LaTeX, a powerful typesetting software, allowing individuals to create structured, professional documents online.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Overleaf is a collaborative writing and publishing system that uses LaTeX a typesetting software that allows for the creation of structured, professional documents online.
```

> It is particularly favored by academics and professionals for producing scientific documents, research papers, theses, and presentations due to its precise formatting and styling capabilities, and it supports real-time collaboration between multiple authors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is particularly favored by academics and professionals for producing scientific documents, research papers, theses, and presentations due to its precise formatting and styling capabilities. Overleaf also supports real-time collaboration between multiple authors.
```

<Macro id="iam-requirements" />
 
<Message type="requirement">
  - You have an account and are logged into the [Scaleway console](https://console.scaleway.com)
  - You have [configured your SSH key](/console/my-project/how-to/create-ssh-key/)

>   - You have an Instance running on the Docker Image or has Docker installed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - You have an Instance running on the Docker image or that has Docker installed
```

  - You have `git` installed on the Instance

>   - For optimal performances it is recommended to run this tutorial at least on a DEV1-M instance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - For optimal performances it is recommended to run this tutorial on a DEV1-M Instance or any Instance with more than 10 GB of volume.
```

>   - For optimal performances it is recommended to run this tutorial on an Instance with more than 30 GB of storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - For optimal performance it is recommended to run this tutorial on an Instance with more than 30 GB of storage.
```

</Message>

<Message type="tip">

>   Overleaf requires Docker. Make sure to run this tutorial on an Instance running the Docker InstantApp image or make sure [Docker is installed](/tutorials/install-docker-ubuntu-jammy-jellyfish/) on the Instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Make sure to run this tutorial on an Instance running the Docker InstantApp image or make sure [Docker is installed](/tutorials/install-docker-ubuntu-jammy-jellyfish/) on the Instance, as Overleaf requires Docker.
```

</Message>

## Installing Overleaf community edition

1. Connect to your Instance using SSH.
    ```
    ssh root@<YOUR-INSTANCE-IP>
    ```
2. Use `git` to downlaoad the Overleaf code repoisitory.
    ```
    git clone https://github.com/overleaf/toolkit.git /opt/overleaf-toolkit
    ```
3. Enter the Overleaf `overleaf-toolkit` directory.
    ```
    cd /opt/overleaf-toolkit
    ```
4. Run the following command to copy the configuration files
    ```
    ./bin/init
    ```
5. Download and start the Overleaf container and its requirements
    ```
    ./bin/up
    ```
    <Message type="tip">
      * If a web server is already running on port 80, be sure to stop it before executing the above command.
      * Dowloading and configuring the application for the first start may take some time.
    </Message>
6. Stop the application by pressing `CTRL+C`.

> 7. Open the file `./config/overleaf.rc` in a text editor and edit the line `NGINX_HTTP_PORT=80`. Set the value to `NGINX_HTTP_PORT=8877`, then save the file and exit the editor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. Open the file `./config/overleaf.rc` in a text editor and edit the `NGINX_HTTP_PORT=80` line . Set the value to `NGINX_HTTP_PORT=8877`, then save the file and exit the editor.
```

## Configuring a systemd script

> If the previous command runs overleaf correctly, it is time to create a systemd daemon service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once Overleaf runs correctly, you can create a systemd daemon service.
```

> 1. Create and open the file `/etc/systemd/system/overleaf.service` in a text editor of your choice and past the following content into it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create and open the `/etc/systemd/system/overleaf.service` file in a text editor of your choice and paste the following content into it:
```

    ```
    [Unit]
    Description=Overleaf Community Edition

    [Service]
    User=root
    WorkingDirectory=/opt/overleaf-toolkit
    ExecStart=/opt/overleaf-toolkit/bin/up
    Restart=always
    RestartSec=10

    [Install]
    WantedBy=multi-user.target

    [Unit]
    Description=Overleaf Community Edition
    
    [Service]
    User=root
    WorkingDirectory=/opt/overleaf-toolkit
    ExecStart=/opt/overleaf-toolkit/bin/up
    Restart=always
    RestartSec=10
    
    [Install]
    WantedBy=multi-user.target
    ```
2. Save the file and exit the text editor.
3. Reload systemd by runnning the following command:
    ```
    systemctl daemon-reload
    ```

> 4. Enable the `overleaf.service` to be started on reboot

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Enable the `overleaf.service` to be started on reboot:
```

    ```
    systemctl enable overleaf.service
    ```
5. Start the Overleaf service:
    ```
    systemctl start overleaf.service
    ```
6. Check the status of the Overleaf service:
    ```
    systemctl status overleaf.service
    ```

## Installing LaTeX packages

The LaTeX packages can now be installed, using TeX Live.

> 1. Run the following command to launch the Texlive manager update.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Run the following command to launch the Texlive manager update:
```

    ```
    docker exec Overleaf Community Edition tlmgr update --self
    ```

> 2. Run the following command to lauch the full `texlive` installation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Run the following command to lauch the full `texlive` installation:
```

    ```
    docker exec Overleaf Community Edition tlmgr install scheme-full
    ```
    <Message type="note">
      The installation of `texlive` may take a while.
    </Message>

## Configuring Nginx

> This tutorial uses [NGINX](https://nginx.org/en/) with [Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/) and [CertBot](https://certbot.eff.org/) as an SSL enabled reverse proxy to secure the connection between the client and our server.

Reviewer: Is the all-caps correct for Nginx? I don't know how it should be written.

Author: They usually write it NGINX but I can change it if it bothers you

Reviewer: No it's fine

1. Install Certbot on the server:
    ```
    apt install python3-certbot-nginx
    ```
2. Generate the certificate, by running the following command:
    ```
    sudo certbot --nginx certonly
    ```

    SSL certificates issued by Let's Encrypt are valid for 90 days. Certbot comes with the option to automatically renew the certificate.
3. Configure a cron job that launches Certbot daily to check the status of the certificate. Open the crontab by typing:
    ```
    crontab -e
    ```
4. Add the following line which will stop Nginx, renew the certificate and restart the web server daily at 4:30 in the morning:
    ```
    30 4 * * * /opt/letsencrypt/certbot-auto renew --pre-hook "service nginx stop" --post-hook "service nginx start"
    ```

> 5.  Edit the file `/etc/nginx/sites-enabled/default` so that it looks like the following example, to configure Nginx in a way, that it will serve our Overleaf Community Edition site as default site:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5.  Edit the `/etc/nginx/sites-enabled/default` file so that it looks like the example below. This allows you to configure Nginx in a way that will serve our Overleaf Community Edition site as default site:
```
